MICRBIOL 612:  Microbial Informatics

Instructor:  Patrick D. Schloss, PhD
Office hours:  Mondays (3:00-5:00 PM) in 1520A MSRB I

Lectures:  Tuesdays and Thursdays (10:00-11:00 AM)
Laboratory:  Fridays (1:30-3:30 PM)
Location: 5623 Med Sci II



Coruse description.  Increasingly, microbiologists are generating large and varied datasets that must be integrated with data from traditional approaches to test hypotheses and identify new avenues of research.  This course will give microbiologists the background they need to design robust experiments, implement traditional statistical approaches for small and large datasets, and utilize the R statistical programming software to perform well-documented and reproducible results.  The R statistical software language will be used throughout the course to introduce students to statistical techniques and computer programming.  R is a powerful open source programming language that anyone can contribute code to.  This has resulted in its widespread use, especially in the field of biostatistics and bioinformatics.  In addition to a comprehensive suite of statistical resources, R is capable of producing highly customizable data visualizations.

Course structure.  Microbial Informatics will consist of two hours of lecture per week plus a two-hour hands on computer session.  The lectures will present the theory behind concepts and the computer sessions will allow students to complete exercises in pairs.  The first half of the course will emphasize R’s statistical foundation and the second half will introduce students to computer programming using R.  In each half, students will complete a project.  For the first half, students will analyze some element of data from their research using concepts that were covered in class.  In the second half, students will create an R-based program to address a biological question; it is hoped that the biological question is related to the students’ research.  Students are expected to provide their own laptop computers – Mac and Windows are acceptable.  We will install R and Rstudio during the first class.

Grading.  Grades will be assigned based on students’ performance in the Friday laboratories (50%) and the two projects (25% each). The first project will require students to recreate a data analysis from one of their lab’s recent publications. The second project will require students to create a package to perform a useful function that their laboratory will benefit from.

Text books.  Students should obtain the following books:

Buffalo, V (2014). Bioinformatics Data Skills.

Dalgaard, P (2008).  Introductory Statistics with R, 2nd edition.

Matloff, N  (2011).  The Art of R Programming.

Chacon, S (2010). ProGit.

Additional materials. Supplemental YouTube videos and online tutorials will be assigned.
 
Software. You will need to install R and Rstudio
